# Conclusion {#sec:conclusion}

Prompted by rising deployments of VRE, policy-makers are contemplating redesigning operational practices in their jurisdictions to deliver more effective and efficient balancing in decarbonising power systems and electricity markets. Given the challenges and complexities of the design problem, these outcomes require flexible, "second-best" and context-specific solutions.

This thesis aims to address the following research question:

> Given existing design challenges and increasing penetrations of variable renewable energy resources as energy transition proceeds, how should we design or, at the very least, approach the design of operational practices for balancing electricity markets?

The broad scope of this research question was narrowed through two research objectives (see below), which were investigated through models and detailed empirical studies of facets of the Australian National Electricity Market. In this chapter, I first summarise the main findings of the research within this thesis according to the research objective they address. Specifically, [@sec:conclusion-ro1] summarises insights from [Chapter @sec:fcs] that address Research Objective 1, and [@sec:conclusion-ro2] summarises the main findings from [Chapter @sec:reserves] and [Chapter @sec:info], which together address Research Objective 2. I then highlight potential opportunities for future work in [@sec:conclusion-future_work]. Finally, I provide brief closing remarks in [@sec:conclusion-closing_remarks].

## Research Objective 1 {#sec:conclusion-ro1}

> **RO1**: To determine what features are needed in centrally-coordinated arrangements for procuring frequency control services during energy transition.

Frequency control services are a significant component of a system operator's balancing toolkit and are critical to ensuring that imbalances are quickly addressed. The design of frequency control arrangements in restructured electricity industries will need to be revisited as resource mixes, network topologies and broader market arrangements and policy settings change with growing penetrations of variable renewable energy resources.

Based on the review of North American and European frequency control arrangements and the analysis of the NEM's presented in [Chapter @sec:fcs], I offer four insights consisting of desirable features and design principles for policy-makers revisiting their jurisdiction's frequency control arrangements during energy transition:

1. Control deficiencies may not be addressable through introducing new frequency control services. While this solution may address emerging needs, such as low-inertia operation, policy-makers need to better understand the interdependency, interoperability and interchangeability between frequency control services and the interactions with other technical attributes of the power system (e.g. system strength) to ensure that frequency control is first and foremost effective. Once this has been achieved, the short-run efficiency of arrangements can be improved through mechanisms such as dynamic and probabilistic dimensioning and co-optimising the procurement of interchangeable frequency control services.

2. A dynamically efficient outcome in some power systems may require additional investments in capability. Prices for frequency control services can be strengthened through scarcity pricing, which may better reflect the system's preference for security and reliability. Such pricing mechanisms are complementary to appropriate and efficient cost-allocation based on causation or needs. Both efficient price formation and cost-allocation will improve the potential for frequency control services derivatives, which may assist in providing price signals for investment.

3. System operators should systematically and frequently verify frequency control service delivery, where relevant, and withhold or penalise remuneration when delivery is deemed to be insufficient. If such monitoring is in place, remuneration can be performance-based to drive the provision of high quality frequency control services. Performance monitoring would also enable the system operator to assess frequency control arrangements and identify any deficiencies in control action or procurement.

4. During energy transition, a suitable set of frequency control arrangements will most likely involve a combination of market-based and regulatory mechanisms. Frequency control is a power system public good and achieving frequency stability requires a degree of coordination and cooperation between resources. These characteristics make it difficult to establish complete markets for frequency control services, and an emphasis on market solutions may obscure these characteristics to market participants and undermine effective control. In contrast, regulatory mechanisms may prove to be more robust and resilient in the face of uncertainties, particularly those that are exogenous to the power system (e.g. climate risk). Regardless of whether arrangements are skewed towards market-based mechanisms or regulatory mechanisms, designers should be more forward-looking and avoid assumptions regarding the provision of frequency control capabilities over time, particularly when there is a pervasive competition norm and effective frequency control relies on sequential and hierarchical control actions.

## Research Objective 2 {#sec:conclusion-ro2}

> **RO2**: To better understand how the **capabilities** and **deployability** of balancing flexibility in scheduling timeframes are changing during energy transition, and whether these changes impact the suitability of more decentralised operational balancing practices.

There is a role for empirical studies examining whether decentralised operational balancing practices, such as markets for services and products, are purpose-fit to deliver the balancing flexibility requirements of electricity markets in transition – particularly given that new markets for flexibility (e.g. reserve product markets) can introduce additional costs, constraints and complexity, and even encroach upon the functions of existing operational practices.

By quantifying the time-varying spectrum of balancing flexibility **capabilities** in scheduling timeframes for historical and projected resource mixes in two regions of the NEM in [Chapter @sec:reserves], I show that with higher penetrations of VRE: 1) downwards flexibility margins can be exhausted around noon if wind and solar are unable or unwilling to provide it, 2) upwards flexibility becomes more scarce during morning and evening peak demand events and 3) a greater portion of upwards flexibility is provided by energy-limited resources. Based on these findings and an assessment of various flexibility design options, I recommend that policy-makers examine how existing operational practices can be augmented to elicit upwards flexibility provision, and that duration specifications and sustained footroom procurement be considered for reserve products.

Solely examining *capabilities* is insufficient for understanding the *actual availability* of balancing flexibility given that the latter is shaped by market participation decisions. As such, I also examine some aspects of the **deployability** of balancing flexibility capabilities. In [Chapter @sec:info], I explore how market information, participation rules and participant operational strategies affect scheduling decisions and thus balancing flexibility provision qenergy storage resources, which are widely touted to be critical to balancing decarbonised power systems. I first highlight the increasing frequency and severity of errors in AEMO-generated price forecasts, which are widely used by market participants in the NEM to schedule their resources, and propose a hypothesis that market participant (re)bidding is partially responsible for this phenomenon. I then model the extent to which BESS wholesale energy market arbitrage revenues might be reduced (compared to perfect foresight operation) should these forecasts guide battery energy storage scheduling. I find that revenue reductions can be significant, ranging from from ~15–20% reduction in potential annual arbitrage revenue for a 4 hour BESS to 60+% for a 15 minute BESS. Based on the findings from these analyses, I discuss potential changes to market participant scheduling strategies and market design that could improve scheduling outcomes. I recommend that Australian policy-makers not only increase the frequency at which centralised knowledge processes are run, but also consider whether stricter market participation restrictions might incentivise participant bidding strategies that are less likely to induce sudden price forecast swings that can hamper effective scheduling.

## Future work {#sec:conclusion-future_work}

The broad scope of this thesis's research question and the various limitations of the work within this thesis imposed by assumptions and constraints on scope  mean that there are multiple potential directions and improvements that could be pursued to extend the work contained within this thesis. In the subsections below, I highlight the most significant of these directions and improvements.

### Demand and distributed, consumer-owned energy resources


### Interactions with investment timeframes

### Empirical studies of market participant behaviour

With a specific focus on market information, [Chapter @sec:info] discusses behavioural factors and market participant preferences that influence resource scheduling. However, while most of the studies reviewed in [@sec:info-context-esr-operation] and the storage scheduling outlined in [@sec:info-case_study-bess_simulations] *model* market participant behaviour, there is a need for more in-depth empirical research on market participant behaviour. For instance, analysing market participant rebidding time series data could offer policy-makers with a clearer picture of how participants actually offer balancing flexibility to the system in their jurisdictions. Moreover, the findings from these studies could be used to inform flexibility assessment modelling efforts (e.g. input bidding assumptions for market models). In particular, such studies are likely to better illustrate how market participants manage resources across a portfolio – a significant concern in jurisdictions such as the NEM that must contend with supply-side concentration and vertical re-integration (i.e. firms that operate a retail business whilst also owning generation assets) [@australianenergyregulatorStateEnergyMarket2022; @simshauserLessonsAustraliaNational2019; @chesterAustraliaNationalElectricity2024].

### Modelling the network

The system models in [Chapter @sec:reserves] assumed that each modelled market region is a copper-plate network with no interconnection to other regions. Furthermore, the BESS dispatch models in [Chapter @sec:info] assumed that BESS dispatch is not restricted by constraints in the NEM's dispatch engine. As discussed in [Chapter @sec:reserves], transmission network constraints arising from thermal and stability limits are likely to reduce the balancing flexibility available to the system, whereas interconnection is only likely to change the quantity and composition of balancing flexibility under certain conditions. Regardless, modelling both network constraints and interconnection will provide a more accurate picture of the extent to which balancing flexibility capabilities can be realised.

## Closing remarks {#sec:conclusion-closing_remarks}



